building-an-api (#7)
Ada-Developers-Academy/core-unit-2: building-an-api/models-setup.md

```SQL
CREATE DATABASE hello_books_development;
```

### Creating the Tables

Similarly, we need to define the tables that will hold the data of our models.

We can name our tables whatever we'd like. However, Flask and SQLAlchemy will automatically look for tables whose names match the model. For example, for our `Book` model, SQLAlchemy will automatically look for the table named `book`. (Table names are not case-sensitive.)

```SQL
\c hello_books_development;
CREATE TABLE book (
  id INT PRIMARY KEY GENERATED ALWAYS AS IDENTITY,
  title VARCHAR(200),
  description TEXT
);
```

### !callout-warning

## Singular Table Names vs. Plural Table Names

Different situations call for different conventions. In this situation, we suggest naming the table with a singular name, `book`. In other situations, we may have suggested using a plural table name, `books`. If we want to specify that the table name is `books`, there is additional code we need to write (detailed below). However, otherwise, this guide will recommend that we use `book`, and other singular table names with Flask.

### !end-callout

> ## Connecting the DB and Flask

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Connecting the Database and Flask
```

> The following is one of many formats to help locate our database. We choose this format because it will benefit some future setup instructions we have later.

Reviewer: I don't think we need to dwell on how many ways there are to point at the database. Let's just say what we're using. We should introduce it as a connection string, which is super common terminology for this value.

```suggestion
We need to tell Flask where to find our new database. We do this by supplying a _connection string_ that identifies where it is, and how to connect to it.

A connection string resembles the following:
```

```
postgresql+psycopg2://postgres:postgres@localhost:5432/REPLACE_THIS_LAST_PART_WITH_DB_NAME
```

> 

Reviewer: provide an explanation of what is going on in the connection string. Hopefully that well help it seem more approachable and not just a massive chunk of characters.

```suggestion

This tells Flask to connect to our database using the `psycopg2` package we installed from our `requirements.txt`. It connects using the `postgres` protocol using the `postgres` user on the local machine running at port `5432`.

```

The text `REPLACE_THIS_LAST_PART_WITH_DB_NAME` should be replaced with our database's name, `hello_books_development`.

> ### Configure the DB in `app/__init__.py`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Configure the Database in `app/__init__.py`
```

> Read through this code that configures the DB to use SQLAlchemy appropriately for our app.

Reviewer: re-voice for we
```suggestion
We can examine this code, which configures the database to use SQLAlchemy appropriately for our app.
```

```python
from flask import Flask
from flask_sqlalchemy import SQLAlchemy
from flask_migrate import Migrate

db = SQLAlchemy()
migrate = Migrate()

def create_app(test_config=None):
    app = Flask(__name__)

    app.config['SQLALCHEMY_TRACK_MODIFICATIONS'] = False
    app.config['SQLALCHEMY_DATABASE_URI'] = 'postgresql+psycopg2://postgres:postgres@localhost:5432/hello_books_development'

    db.init_app(app)
    migrate.init_app(app, db)

    return app
```

> Then, align your `app/__init__.py` file so it looks identical.

Reviewer: re-voice for we
```suggestion
Then, we can edit our `app/__init__.py` file so it looks identical.
```

On a high-level, this code does the following:

1. Imports and sets up the packages SQLAlchemy and Migrate (a companion package to SQLAlchemy)
1. Sets up `db` and `migrate`, which are conventional variables that give us access to database operations
1. Configures the `app` to include two new SQLAlchemy settings

>    1. We set `app.config['SQLALCHEMY_DATABASE_URI']` to the pathway to our database, `hello_books_development`

Reviewer: explain what the first line is doing
refer to the connection string as a connection string (it's not really a path)
```suggestion
   1. We set `app.config['SQLALCHEMY_TRACK_MODIFICATIONS']` to `False` to hide a warning about a feature in SQLAlchemy that we won't be using.
   1. We set `app.config['SQLALCHEMY_DATABASE_URI']` to the connection string for our database, `hello_books_development`
```

1. Connects `db` and `migrate` to our Flask `app`, using the package's recommended syntax

## Defining the Model

Following the pattern of creating a file for every model, we can execute these commands:

```bash

> $ mkdir app/models

Reviewer: include creating the package file
```suggestion
$ mkdir app/models
$ touch app/models/__init__.py
```

$ touch app/models/book.py
```

Our current project structure likely looks similar to this:

```
.

> ├── README.md
> ├── app
> │   ├── __init__.py
> │   ├── models
> │   │   └── book.py
> │   └── routes.py
> └── requirements.txt

Reviewer: re-order for vscode and include the package file
```suggestion
├── app
│   ├── models
│   │   ├── __init__.py
│   │   └── book.py
│   ├── __init__.py
│   └── routes.py
├── README.md
└── requirements.txt
```

```

> ### Models are Classes that Inherit `db.Model`

Reviewer: verbs should be capitalized. rules vary for the other words, but if we go with the 4 letters is long enough rule, then that and from should also be capitalized
```suggestion
### Models Are Classes That Inherit From `db.Model`
```

Now, inside of `app/models/book.py`, we can define the `Book` model. SQLAlchemy provides a pattern for creating a class for our model that will:

> 1. Connect the model seamlessly with our SQL database, mapping attribute to table column

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Connect the model seamlessly with our SQL database, mapping attributes to table columns
```

1. Give our Flask code the ability to work with `Book` instances, taking advantage of OOP

```python
from app import db

class Book(db.Model):
    id = db.Column(db.Integer, primary_key=True, autoincrement=True)
    title = db.Column(db.String)
    description = db.Column(db.String)
```

| <div style="min-width:250px;"> Piece of Code </div> | Notes                                                                                                                   |
| --------------------------------------------------- | ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| `from app import db`                                | This file needs access to the SQLAlchemy `db`                                                                           |

> | `class Book(...)`                                   | We define a new class, and name it after our model (usually singular)                                                   |

Reviewer: include notice about how this affects the table name that SQLAlchemy will pick
```suggestion
| `class Book(...)`                                   | We define a new class, and name it after our model (usually singular). By default, SQLAlchemy will use the lowercase version of this class name as the name of the table it will create.                                                   |
```

| `db.Model`                                          | Our model will inherit `db.Model`, so if we need to look up documentation, we can start with SQLAlchemy's `Model` class |

> | `id = db.Column(...)`                               | Instances of `Book` will have an attribute `id`, which maps to a database column                                        |

Reviewer: acknowledge that this is different from how we do things with plain old python objects
prefer "will map" since at this point we haven't created the table
```suggestion
| `id = db.Column(...)`                               | Instances of `Book` will have an attribute `id`, which will map to a database column. Notice that this attribute goes outside of any instance method and doesn't reference `self`. This is part of the pattern that models deriving from `db.Model` will follow, even though it's a little different from a typical Python class.                                      |
```

> | `db.Integer`                                        | A column data-type that SQL Alchemy defines. The `id` column accepts integers.                                          |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `db.Integer`                                        | A column data-type that SQL Alchemy defines. The `id` column stores integers.                                          |
```

> | `primary_key=True, autoincrement=True`              | Keyword arguments that allow SQLAlchemy to understand how to fill in the values for new `Book` instances                |

Reviewer: tie back to some of the concepts that came up about primary keys in the SQL lessons
```suggestion
| `primary_key=True, autoincrement=True`              | Keyword arguments that allow SQLAlchemy to understand how to fill in the values for new `Book` instances. Notice how they resemble constraints that can be supplied to a column.                |
```

> | `title = db.Column(db.String)`                      | Creates a `title` attribute, which maps to the string column, `title`                                                   |
> | `description = db.Column(db.String)`                | Creates a `description` attribute, which maps to the string column, `description`                                       |

Reviewer: prefer "will map" since we haven't made the table yet
```suggestion
| `title = db.Column(db.String)`                      | Creates a `title` attribute, which will map to a string column, `title`                                                   |
| `description = db.Column(db.String)`                | Creates a `description` attribute, which will map to a string column, `description`                                       |
```

> Congratulations on defining your first Flask model!

Reviewer: re-voice to we
```suggestion
Congratulations! We've defined our first Flask model!
```

### !callout-info

## SQLAlchemy Has More Options to Configure

There are plenty of more options for configuring our model. We can define more columns of more types, and even create plenty of great helper functions! Follow your curiosity!

### !end-callout

> ### !callout-secondary
> 
> ## Specifying the Table Name
> 
> In this model definition, we can specify the name of the table, using the `__tablename__` property. There is more to research here!
> 
> ### !end-callout

Reviewer: alternatively we can rephrase to make it clear that we _didn't_ do this here, but could. This could be referenced later when discussing single/plural table names during the migration discussion.

```suggestion
### !callout-secondary

## Specifying the Table Name

In model definitions, if we don't like the default name that SQLAlchemy picks we can specify a different name for the table, using the `__tablename__` property. There is more to research here!

### !end-callout
```

> ### Configuring the `Book` Model in `__init__.py`

Reviewer: we're not doing anything to the book model here, we're just making it visible
```suggestion
### Making the `Book` Model Visible to the `app` in `__init__.py`
```

> Now that we've defined `Book`, we need to make sure our `app` sees it. During the configuration step, we need to import `Book` and connect it to our SQLAlchemy `db`.

Reviewer: Other than the import, we don't need to do anything to connect it.
```suggestion
Now that we've defined `Book`, we need to make sure our `app` sees it. To do so, we need to import `Book` during the `app` startup.
```

In `__init__.py`, we'll modify the `create_app()` function.

> There is new code after `db` and `migrate` are initialized, but before the `return app` statement. This code essentially connects the Flask `app` and the SQLAlchemy `db` to see each other.

Reviewer: reworked since the create_all stuff should be removed

```suggestion
Notice the new `import` code after `db` and `migrate` are initialized, but before the `return app` statement. This code ensures that the `Book` model will be available to the `app` when we update our database in a moment.
```

```python
def create_app(test_config=None):
    # app = Flask(__name__)
    # ... app is configured with SQLAlchemy settings
    # ... db and migrate are initialized with app

    from app.models.book import Book

>     with app.app_context():
>         db.create_all()

Reviewer: not needed (and bypasses migration tracking)
```suggestion
```

    return app
```

If we ever design any more models, we'll need to import the new model here too, mimicking the pattern of `from app.models.book import Book`.

> 

Reviewer: we've previously told students that imports go at the top, so acknowledge this difference
```suggestion

### !callout-warning

## Sometimes Imports Don't Go at the Top

Generally we prefer to put `import` statements at the top of our files. However, doing so here would result in an error called a _circular import error_. There are a number of ways to avoid this error, but by far the most straight-forward way is to place this `import` inside a function so that it doesn't run until the function gets called.

<br />

Sometimes we need to bend what we consider to be a best practice to address an immediate situation.

### !end-callout

```

## Database Migrations

> Everything is set up! The remaining actions left are to use our Flask tools to generate migrations.

Reviewer: everything isn't set up, but after the migration it will be
```suggestion
Our model is set up! The remaining actions left are to use our Flask tools to generate the migrations that we'll be able to use to update our database.
```

Our database development workflow will be as follows:

> 1. Set up the db on the Flask end once

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Set up the database on the Flask end once
```

1. Generate migration files
1. Apply the migration files

### One-Time `init` Setup

> After the first time that a database and at least one table are setup, we can do this one-time setup command:

Reviewer: rephrase due to table handling change
```suggestion
Once we have created our database and configured the connection string, we can do this one-time setup command:
```

> If we ever design any more models, we'll need to import the new model here too, mimicking the pattern of `from app.models.book import Book`.
> 
> ## Database Migrations
> 
> Everything is set up! The remaining actions left are to use our Flask tools to generate migrations.
> 
> Our database development workflow will be as follows:
> 
> 1. Set up the db on the Flask end once
> 1. Generate migration files
> 1. Apply the migration files
> 
> ### One-Time `init` Setup
> 
> After the first time that a database and at least one table are setup, we can do this one-time setup command:
> 
> ```bash
> (venv) $ flask db init
> ```
> 

Reviewer 2: I'm wondering if we could do this collapsible text sort of thing for these pieces as a quick fix...
NOTE: I had to remove the triple ticks for the bash piece to get the suggestion to work so you'll need to add those back!

```suggestion
<details>
<summary>Click here if you're curious what we needed to update in the `app/__init__.py` file to properly include our Book model in our configuration.</summary>
If we ever design any more models, we'll need to import the new model here too, mimicking the pattern of `from app.models.book import Book`.

## Database Migrations

Everything is set up! The remaining actions left are to use our Flask tools to generate migrations.

Our database development workflow will be as follows:

1. Set up the db on the Flask end once
1. Generate migration files
1. Apply the migration files

### One-Time `init` Setup

After the first time that a database and at least one table are setup, we can do this one-time setup command:

```bash
(venv) $ flask db init

</details>
```

Reviewer: I have suggestions to bring the text in line with have Flask create the table, so hiding shouldn't be required.

### Generate Migrations After Each Model Change

We can generate database migrations with the following command. This command should be run every time there's a change to a file in the `models` folder.

```bash

> (venv) $ flask db migrate

Reviewer: include the message option to label our migration
```suggestion
(venv) $ flask db migrate -m "adds Book model"
```

```

> 

Reviewer: explanation for the -m option by comparing it to commit messages
```suggestion

Notice that just like when we make `git` commits, here too we can record a message summarizing the changes we have made. When running this command ourselves, we should replace the `"adds Book model"` with a description relevant to our recent changes.

```

A neat side-effect about generating migrations is that we get to appreciate the migration files. The generated migrations are placed in a new folder now, the `migrations` folder!

```
.

> ├── README.md
> ├── app
> │   ├── __init__.py
> │   ├── models
> │   │   └── book.py
> │   └── routes.py
> ├── migrations
> │   ├── README
> │   ├── alembic.ini
> │   ├── env.py
> │   ├── script.py.mako
> │   └── versions
> └── requirements.txt

Reviewer: reorder to better match vscode and include the package files
```suggestion
├── app
│   ├── models
│   │   ├── __init__.py
│   │   └── book.py
│   ├── __init__.py
│   └── routes.py
├── migrations
│   ├── alembic.ini
│   ├── env.py
│   ├── README
│   ├── script.py.mako
│   └── versions
├── README.md
└── requirements.txt
```

```

At the introductory level of Flask, it's unlikely that we will touch many of the files in the `migrations` folder.

> ### Apply Migrations AFter Each Model Change

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Apply Migrations After Each Model Change
```

We need to run this separate command to actually run and apply the generated migrations:

```bash
(venv) $ flask db upgrade
```

> This command should be run after every time we've generated new migrations and want to apply them.

Reviewer 2: My understanding of this lesson tells me this is true. If it's not, I would love to understand why so that I can make an alternative suggestion on how to add clarity to these two commands

```suggestion
This command should be run after every time we've generated new migrations and want to apply them. At this introductory level, there is no reason for us to generate migrations without immediately applying them so we should always run `flask db migrate` and `flask db upgrade` back-to-back in that order.
```

Reviewer: Yep, students should always run them back to back. Though when working in a group, only one person should modify a model and generate the migration (and run upgrade locally). Those should get checking in and pulled by the other team members. Each other team member would then run the upgrade without running the migrate.

> 

Reviewer: Add a section about confirming that the migration applied successfully. Suggestion in following comment. No suggestion due to code.

Reviewer: ### Confirm the Migration

We should now be able to connect to our database with `psql` and confirm that the `book` table has been created. Connect to Postgres with:

```
psql -U postgres
```

Once in the Postgres interactive terminal we can run `\c hello_books_development` to connect to the database. We can list the tables in the database with `\dt` which should show us `book`, and another table called `alembic_version` which tracks our migrations. We can display the columns of the `book` table by running `\d book`, which will show `id`, `title`, and `description`.

Congratulations! We've created our first Flask model table!

Reviewer: Add an acknowledgement about the singularity of the table name despite our previous guidance in the SQL lessons. This is based on the section that had been up around the manual table creation section, expanded.

```suggestion

### !callout-warning

## Singular Table Names vs. Plural Table Names

Different situations call for different conventions. Notice that SQLAlchemy used the name `book` for the table. Previously, we have suggested using plural table names, like `books`.

<br />

Traditional database practice often uses plural names for tables, since conceptually a table holds many records. A `books` table would hold many book records. However, class names usually use singular names, since they are a description for a single instance of our type. So we make a `Book` class rather than a `Books` class. For simplicity, SQLAlchemy uses this class name for the table name.

<br />

We could tell SQLAlchemy that we would rather use a table name of `books`. There is only a small amount of additional code we would need to write. But then our class and table names wouldn't match, which could lead to confusion. As a result, we will recommend that we use `book`, and other singular table names with Flask. We should be ready to adapt our practices to the context in which we are operating. Even though database tables are often plural, sometimes they will be singular!

### !end-callout

```

### !callout-danger

## Read-through First, Repeat Second

We **highly suggest** reading or watching through this lesson fully, before repeating on your own machine.

### !end-callout

### !callout-danger

## Prioritize Familiarity

It may be better to think about this lesson as a resource to be familiar with, rather than commit all new knowledge to memory at once.

### !end-callout

## Hello Books API

### Before This Lesson

This lesson uses the [Hello Books API](https://github.com/AdaGold/hello-books-api). Before beginning this lesson, we should have covered:

- Cloning the repo onto our machine
- Creating and activating a virtual environment
- Installing dependencies
- Running the Flask server
- Creating basic endpoints
- Testing those endpoints in Postman

## Creating the Database

Before we work with models in Flask, we need to create a database for our project.

There are no naming rules, but let's give our database a similar name to our project. We'll add in "development" as a descriptor: `hello_books_development`

```SQL
CREATE DATABASE hello_books_development;

> ```

Reviewer 2: Can we note that we are executing this command within psql, just to avoid students trying to run this in the terminal then asking us for help?
